And now back on again.
Side two.
The tape is cheap, my friend.
I can tell you only that there are three other Washington letters here.
DocuSend.
Find here.
in the collection.
But there are some fun things, too.
For instance, Gay Randall knew of my interest in my little Dutch girlfriend, Margarita Ketwieda Zellem McLeod, a Dutch girl married to a Dutch oxen McLeod, who, uh, applied for a passport, visa and passport, into France in
End of 1960, it probably didn't go in until January 17.
And as we say in the trade, it's signed in, true name and sue name.
It's a fun vacuum.
M. G. Zella MacLeod.
Mata Hari.
It's their last...
Please ask occasionally to go in the front.
This is Matt.
For the sake of my typist here, who's probably going to be confused, we're looking at a visa application signed by, has two names, Mata, M-A-T-A dash, with an accent, Hari, H-A-R-I, and her name, her given name is what again?
Margarita.
M-A-R-G-U-E-R-I-T-E.
Right.
Mecca.
Margarita is M-A-R-G-A-R-E-P-H-A.
Gertrida is G-E-R-T-R-U-I-D-A.
Her maiden name is Zella, Z-E-L-L-E.
And her married name is McLeod, M-C, capital L-E-O-D.
And these all appear in these documents, too.
And this document, her visa application, is all in her own handwriting.
Well, it's a friend document.
It's a friend document.
It wouldn't... It's a curiosa, really.
They should tell you what that cost me.
Dave was a good friend.
I think I paid $20.
Come on.
Yeah.
On a more serious note over there in that blue solid case on that same shelf, the original manuscripts for a wonderful World War II story, true story, which you know is The Man Who Never Was by Ewan Martin.
Oh, yeah, that's famous.
The Flurry of the Body on the shore of Spain.
Uh, those are Ewan's original manuscripts, which I got.
He was a good friend of mine, and he was the case officer for the operation.
There are all sorts of interesting little things here.
And—just like that?
Yep.
Uh— May I follow you?
This book here, The Memoirs of Secret Service by Matthew Smith, 1699, is
From my standpoint, the first book in English completely devoted to an intelligence operation or two.
I have here an inscribed copy from Matthew Smith, the Lord High Chancellor of England.
Wow.
You were serious at this point.
Yes.
But I consider that the cornerstone book.
That's the base soundbook of this collection.
The conscribed copy, I think, as I recall it, came to me through one of those lovely cooperations in librarians.
When the acquisitions chief of the Folger Library wrote and said they weren't interested in buying it, but she thought for sure I might and was rushing the catalog over to me to buy it if I wanted, and I did.
Is this Mata Hari, by the way?
This is Mata Hari.
This is a contemporary photograph.
There are two pictures over here.
Well, it's the same picture.
There's a story behind the other.
But this is the original.
And when you're collecting books in America, American intelligence, I consider the foundation book the proceedings of a board of general officers respecting Major John Andre,
That is the full title of that book.
Yeah, right.
This is the Board of General offices convened by General Washington to consider what to do with John Andre on the Washington news.
The board found Andre was a spy.
He is, of course, the case officer, not a spy ever, the case officer in the defection of Benedict Arnold at West Point.
It was just a book written about him about a year or two ago.
Yeah, I'll be back again.
I'm sorry, I'll check this out for something else.
Lotta Harry was a pretty nice-looking woman, wasn't he?
I didn't realize that was, uh, what we'd call a bush shot.
Well, uh, the fact is that you don't get pictures normally of Manna Harry in the nude.
Uh-huh.
She always has a brassiere and these two damn little anklets.
Anything else you can have.
Uh, so, uh, these are the famous veils from which she danced her.
Yeah, yeah.
There are seven of them, or however many, and so forth.
But, uh,
She's a curiosa, really, in the business.
Well, but she certainly rounds out the— Rounds out?
Is that the phrase?
What's the Soviet have?
Oh, that was made here.
Oh, okay.
There's something you don't normally see.
That's a manganese module from the bottom of the Pacific.
They're worth something.
What procession is it?
It's a manganese module.
used Glomar Explorer, made in Voyage, in 1974.
Well, that wasn't— The Glomar's job was to get all these minerals from the bottom of the ocean.
Indeed.
That's what it said.
I read it in the paper.
Aha.
There's the launching metal for the Glomar.
You know, you get all these things when— Well, did you work on the Glomar project?
No.
What could I do?
Is that from, is that manganese thing from that particular site?
No, no.
This is the Maidenvoid.
Okay.
Well, they were testing it as a mining ship, really.
Yeah.
Testing it.
But there are all sorts of odds that end here in the collection.
The collection is about five thousand dollars.
Um, it's going to Yale, you said?
It's going to Yale.
Okay.
There are a group of books there, about 65, 70 books down there on the bottom shelf.
Those books, very high to come by in this country, are the books produced by the students in the bazaars of Tehran from the captured documents captured in the U.S.
Embassy in September 79.
That's what these books got here.
There are now sixty-eight volumes of them, and they produce the original document in English and a Farsi translation.
What you're telling me then is that the collection continues to grow.
That's why you see it on the floor instead of on the shelves.
I don't know where it's going to go.
Yeah, but I mean you continue to work at it.
One of us has got to quit.
I think after I get through the next edition of the bibliography for the Defense Intelligence College, I may ease it up a little.
Is this bibliography something I can obtain by contacting the... Just write the... I wrote down, yeah.
Just write and ask for a copy.
They're getting scared.
I think there are 14,000 copies of it.
It's free, though.
Great.
Do they have a phone number?
Yeah.
I don't know what that got in here.
Well, I wrote that address down there.
Yeah, that's a zip code.
Because you have a forward in there, which might be useful to me.
Oh, right now.
There we go.
Three-seven-three.
Something.
But it's the Defense Intelligence College, which must be listed, right?
Yeah.
But writing bibliography, you know, there's no charm to that.
Yeah, but you have created, the bibliography on this subject is basically what you decide it's going to be.
Well, there are two or three of us who can do it.
One of the best, of course, is George Constantinides.
A fellow Greek.
I'm awfully good at it.
This is the best commercially available.
Intelligence and Espionage, Colon, and Analytical Bibliography by George C. Constantinides.
Z-O-N-S-T-A-N-T-I-N-I-D-E-S, Constantinides.
And Russ Boren's collection, which is big and mess, is a little different.
It's a little broader than mine.
And he doesn't go in for first editions and manuscripts and stuff.
Yours is a collector's collection.
Mine is a collector's collection.
Russ would just soon have a Xerox copy.
He's looking for information.
That's right.
And his collection has now been given to Georgetown Library.
His name is what?
Colonel Russell J. Bowen, B-O-W-E-N.
The collection is in the Lawinger Library at Georgetown University.
We're all three very good friends, fortunately, so we're not cutting anyone's heart out.
But as an archive, when a collection goes to an institution such as Yale, clearly the idea is to support scholarship, and what do you feel you are giving to the scholarly community here?
What will scholars be able to glean from
depending what angle they're going in from, they will find books in English, virtually all the collection is in English, on what is now the profession of intelligence and its role in national security policies of the government.
That's one aspect of it.
Where does intelligence fit into all this overall security picture?
There are some who worry about, can you have intelligence in a democracy?
And there are books and chapters on that sort of thing.
The growth and building of Central Intelligence Agency is here.
And then there are countless books.
of memoirs by intelligence officers, clandestine collectors or spies if you prefer, covert action, whatever aspects you may be looking for.
Now, strangely enough, these outside groups like the Association of Foreign Intelligence Officers and the National Intelligence Study Center were first looking at the question of
teaching intelligence in the United States, universities and colleges, they found that there were about, stretching it, I'd say about 25 courses, either seminars in intelligence or segments of courses in international affairs, political science, with intelligence segments in it.
Today, Afio, of which I served as chairman for two years, is in touch with about 200 professors who are teaching some aspect of this business and whom we can help by bibliographical assistance, sending them good books.
Ninety percent of these books are
Dreadful.
But at least I have to read them to know the good from the bad.
Sure.
Whether it's going to bibliography or not.
Or they've got nuggets and you've got to know your business well enough to know what the nuggets are and what the junk is.
Now, Alan Dulles, when he was Director of Central Intelligence, was an avid reader.
And he used to go crazy if I dropped it.
brought into the executive dining room something that I'd just acquired, like a Washington letter or a first edition of this or that.
He was going, hey, and he used to say to me, what is the state of the CIA library on intelligence?
And I said, Alan, you don't have one.
And they didn't.
They had a few books here and there, handful.
And that made him mad.
And finally, after ten years as legislative council, longer than which one doesn't serve or die, he said, I mean, I want you to build a collection in the agency on all aspects of the intelligence profession, since the beginning of time to the latest book.
So he basically made you a curator, a de facto curator.
in all languages from the beginning of time.
With a budget?
With a budget.
And we established the Historical Intelligence Collection in the agency, with me as curator, and that was the title.
And I sat in that job for many, many years in addition to other duties.
So it was kind of a collateral duty, as we used to say.
Well, it was the main duty, and the collaterals forced me to travel abroad from time to time, and I could also collect books on the side for the agency.
How would you rate their collection then?
When I left, having started virtually from scratch, they had about 21,000 bodies.
It's bigger now.
First editions?
No.
No, no, no.
Obviously not, but they weren't acquiring for the sake of building a collection, but mainly to build a resource library.
That's right.
Allen looked at it as something for training purposes, for the study of precedents.
So you've had to develop again the bibliography.
Well, in effect, the card catalog is the bibliography.
But it was about 21,000 volumes when I retired in 1974.
It's bigger now.
It still goes on now.
And it's been very useful.
I would say.
How much did they love to have your intellectual now?
Well, they make noises, but they get their hands slapped.
They know they're not going to get it.
A lot of people made noises.
Hoover Institute made noises.
They can't have it.
It's going to Yale, period, the end.
Oh, I'd give the collection out there.
Oh, I'd give them a copy of the Washington letter, or they'd make a copy for themselves.
where I thought it was appropriate for them to have it, you know.
Sure.
I was a spy in the swamps for the Indians, so I wouldn't bother you, you know.
That's funny.
Now, what sort of questions do you have, if any?
I think, believe it or not, we've covered most of it.
I've just only had to direct you really, I guess,
I'd kind of like to know personally your attraction to intelligence as a profession.
Oh, boy.
Maybe just a rumination on that.
Well, I'd put it this way.
Of course, when I started, I didn't know for nothing.
I wasn't the only rare book man at the intelligence school in Harrisburg, by the way, when I got there.
I believe that.
There was a registrar named Professor
I guess he was a major then—Ted Hillis from Yale.
There was another staff member named Arthur A. Holton—I've forgotten Arthur's rank at the time—who came out of the— Pretty fair collection.
Chief of—well, he was actually the head of the Red Book Room at the Library of Congress when he went into the service.
Did you know Arthur?
Yeah.
Any insight on why he stopped collecting?
No.
He's a strange man, I think.
When I say I knew him, you know, at the Gretaire Club, how are you today, or the rare book collectors gathering.
Roger Stoddard at Harvard suggests that it would be just as interesting, and he never mentioned Colton, but I think maybe he was a—this is while Arthur was still alive, but he said, you know, I'd be just as interested in why some people stopped collecting his stuff.
I think Arthur got the impression that his kid Stoddard was crazy.
Well, not when they saw the results of the sales, though.
Well, that's right.
That enabled them to buy more horses.
But what you do with these dirty old books are quite a sacred thing of space and money.
I think there was no follow-on.
Just as I'm the only member of this generation of four-timers who have any interest in books, other than because you're sitting on top of the Proud's library not knowing what's in it.
I'm the only second generation of the collecting Fort Samuels to follow up.
Roger Stoddard, I think he's been shafted at Harvard.
You're not the only one?
Including Roger.
Roger's a very decent man who wouldn't complain.
No, but having Larry Dowler drops on top of you?
At least we got him out of Beineken.
Roger's a wonderful man.
He's a good guy, right?
Yeah.
He's helped me a lot, I can tell you.
Well, one of the things of cooperation between libraries, for instance, when I made a deal with Bill Jackson and, more importantly, later with Bill Bond, I don't collect material on the Dreyfus case, which is a major, major SNI case.
What?
Dreyfus case.
Yeah, but why don't you collect it?
Because the great collection is at Harvard.
This is a world-shaking collection.
And I'm not going into an auction room with the thought that I don't know that the other dealer bidding over there is fitting for Harvard.
Roger claims he doesn't have a lot of money to play with.
Yeah, I think there was no endowment with the collection when it came from the lawyer I think.
But in any event, I told him I would not buy or certainly not buy without checking to find out if Harvard was going to be in.
He's quite envious of Beinecke.
He said, we don't have a Beinecke in Ireland.
We don't have a Beinecke family.
Well, a lot of that's now pretty well finished except for the trust funds.
Eddie Beinecke was quite a great personal friend of mine.
We used to go fishing down the islands together.
a great fellow carrying out his father's wishes.
And Bill Bonnicki was fine, but quite differently, and he is not using much of his money for the library.
Other things at Yale interest him more at the moment.
When, just to jump completely off track, like I mentioned to you earlier when we were chatting downstairs, that one of my chapters will be on the University of Texas.
What some people might say was the, not indiscreet certainly, but when they acquired from 58 to 73, they spent millions of dollars to play with and they bought everything in sight.
Some people might say, some people have suggested they bought perhaps some worthless things.
I think that's probably true.
But then I've heard other people say, well, you know, Beinecke almost did the same thing.
They almost did the same thing at Yale, but it's an Ivy League school that never got the attention of Texas.
Have you ever heard that suggested?
No, never.
Did Yale buy at a very aggressive level?
No.
I mean, are they buying, say, just below what Texas was trying to do?
That's a very unfair assertion.
Well, for instance, I know when Texas bought the poor-time or Gutenberg Bible,
There was a lot of ill will on the faculty for spending two million, too, on a book, which could have been better used, they thought, for faculty salaries and all that sort of thing.
That was quite expressed.
And there was some of that when Beinecke was being built.
I remember a major figure in the Yale Law School.
May have been the dean.
No, it's the guy who went out to Stanford, professor, who came and addressed these law school alumni down here once and was very scornful of this goddamn building going up next door because the Yale Law Library wanted to put its stacks in there.
And excavations were made and concreted and so forth so that they could put some of their stacks under the Beinecke.
But the Beinecke family wouldn't pay for it.
And he was very angry about that.
Here he was, wasting his money on his goddamn edifice with rare books in it.
When we need SPAC space and don't have the funds, they've shored up the land for us and concreted it.
But they will pay for it.
And there was that sort of thing.
And I talked to the dean of Lewoska at the time, and I said, shut him up, and shut him up quick.
And he'd never open his yap again.
I think aesthetically, the Beinecke is about the most beautiful rare book structure I've seen, and I've really been traveling to all of them.
It's lovely.
Have you ever heard any criticism, though, that it's exposed to light?
Well, I've got that tinted windows and all.
Light is bad for books, we know that.
Well, I think it's handled in such a way as not to be a problem.
We're putting a lot of money and time at Yale now into conservation.
That is one thing that Texas does, really.
You know, they kind of lead the pack on that.
Texas does a wonderful thing in conservation.
I have to give Decker Turner, that's his big contribution, I think, to that conservation department.
I think we've covered quite a bit here.
You're a nickel.
I think, if you don't mind, if there are any other questions, I'll call you at some point, now that we've met.
How useful is this?
Oh, I can assure you it's wonderful.
You talked about intelligence as a profession.
It will be called the Walter Forstheimer Collection?
I call this the Walter Forstheimer Collection on intelligence service.
Okay.
And I'm sure that when Yale gets it, it'll— It'll be still known as the spy collection, I know.
They want the money and the money.
They don't do a damn budget.
You think?
Excuse me, maybe.
They could do without it.
They'd be happiest planned.
Except for a writing letter or two.
Oh, yeah.
But I think you've made it pretty clear that it comes as a collection.
That is correct.
Otherwise it doesn't go there.
That's correct.
And they've given you a—because I've seen collections that have been broken up.
Yes, correct.
Well, this will be broken up only to the extent that the manuscript parts go to the manuscript collection.
Archivally, they can't toss these things on the shelves.
And then the books will stay together.
That's important.
I would think so.
You see, one of the problems is that a lot of these books are duplicated in Yale's normal college library stack.
Sure, Cloak and Gowl, for instance, has got to be there.
Cloak and Gowl will be there because of Robin, but you get Truman's memoirs.
I couldn't care less about Truman as President of the United States except that he is the man who established CIA.
has written about it in his memoirs, and some other things in his memoirs.
Same way with de Gaulle.
I don't care about de Gaulle, except that he had these tremendous dealings with the French Resistance.
I think you showed me—oh, yeah, one other question.
Is there anything that you think the collection lacks?
Do you have a want list?
Basically, do you— You're an archivist.
I'm sorry, which?
Girl archivists.
I've never made a warrant list.
Oh, maybe if I'm in a bookstore I know and have a title written, but not really.
A warrant list, A, it's hard to make, and B, you really run into diminishing returns.
I mean, for instance, there is no post Tamerlane in Massachusetts, you know.
I mean, Harvard doesn't have any.
Well, they could have had Bradley's.
Well, yeah, they could have, you know, $150K.
Bill Self bought it out in L.A.
In fact, I'm going to see him out in L.A.
He's a producer.
There's a tremendous amount of stuff in the Martin Collection from a pair out in Chicago named, I think, Greenhill.
Never heard of them.
All sorts of stuff in there.
Don't know who they are.
Ralph Newman bought a lot of stuff.
He got the Declaration of Independence.
Oh, is that what he bought?
He bought something right there.
He bought a few other things, but he bought a 1.5 he spent for that.
He showed up that day in a red, white and blue striped shirt and a bow tie.
I think I pretty well covered it.
So you don't have a want list.
There were no glaring omissions here.
Oh, there are things running through my head that I could use, yeah.
But the most interesting things are things I really don't know about and will turn up.
Are you going to see it go to Yale, or it will go?
I'll go first.
But they want the money, or gosh, they don't care.
But you're a good lawyer that you are.
I'm sure you've taken care of... Yeah, okay.
Take something as mundane as the Warren Commission report.
Uh-huh.
That's a modern book now, you said.
Yeah.
You don't even have a dust jacket on it.
No.
GPO printed.
But each member of the Warren Commission got 15 copies.
And each one signed all of them.
There you have it.
And there I have it.
But this is—and I've seen copies of this floating around second-hand book fairs at 600 bucks—but this is what you call an association copy.
And it's to Walter.
I take great pleasure in sending you this copy of the Warren Commission report.
signed by each of the members of the Commission, signed by whom?
Alan Dulles.
Alan Dulles, 10 February, 65.
Actually, he didn't send it.
He brought it over for—brought over a cocktail for him.
He said, let's have a drink.
And then we asked the Russians, you know, whether we couldn't translate the Commission report, whether they were allowed to be distributed in the Soviet Union.
So USIA had the thing translated into Russian, printed up, I think, 1100 copies.
And the Russians went to now, which ain't no mind hailed it.
So in a warehouse somewhere in this town, there are 1099 copies of the damn thing in Russia.
And there's the stairs.
Is it signed by anybody?
No.
Salad.
These two shells just deal with me.
Warren Commission Report, and Intelligence, accusing us of assassinating him or the FBI of assassinating him.
Any scurrilous novel like the Three Days of the Condor, you know, which— I'm in that.
You're in that?
Yeah.
How so?
Well, I guess that's the way it was written about it.
This is the guy who keeps the library—the agency collection on Intelligence.
He keeps it in the house up on Capitol Hill and manipulates it.
Are you the bad guy in the book?
I'm the guy who keeps the collection.
I made the collection.
In the book, in the novel?
Well, also in the novel, yeah.
But I made it for the agency, originally.
That's the collection I set up.
The collection that— The historical intelligence collection.
That forms the premise of Three Days of the Fund.
But I mean, do you have things like that in your collection?
There are about 20 shelves of fiction downstairs, but I don't like fiction, television fiction, no professional does, really, basically.
And so, they're there, but they're written by friends of mine.
I'm going to rosy on.
Yeah, I'm taking too much of your time.
Are you kidding?
This is wonderful.
I'm glad to see you have a secure place here.
You see, please, I'll carry on you by the reference collection.
Carry on that.
Okay.
All of that is Moliere reference.
It's even shelved up to the Fs and carded up to the Ns.
My father's cards are pretty good, but the stuff I've added, of course, I just hung that tiny.
That is wonderful.
And these are all modern editions of what the hell do you have to do with them in my family.
These little ones.
Yeah, those are contemporary.
But you've got some of this stuff goes back to the 70s.
I've heard somewhere that you moved to the Watergate mainly because you needed quarters large enough to house the library.
That's apocryphal, right?
I wanted a better apartment, a swimming pool, a hotel coming up with a dining room so I can go over and eat.
I want to point out that there are books just stacked all over the place on the deck here on the floor.
Perhaps three or four hundred books, I would estimate.
Don't rub it in.
Well, you should see my house.
But there are two apartments here, you see.
I don't sleep here.
I sleep in the other apartment on the other wing where I sleep.
So this is just where you work and live?
Yeah.
I mean, I'm not working— Well, I entertain you.
Since this was a hole in the ground when I bought it, the floors have been specially reinforced with concrete and steel.
Really?
Yeah.
So this was built to your specs?
Oh, yeah.
These are two bedrooms.
So you go back to the beginning of the complex.
That's right.
You were here when the disquietude took place, I gather.
Yeah, I was—I was the—
head of the board security committee at the time, ran that show.
I'm glad that must have been something.
That was nothing.
It was amusing.
As long as you didn't have anything to do with it, it was amusing.
Oh, you mean when my friends hopped in there?
Yeah.
That's another story.
You'll be interested in that, but I'll look for that thing.
Okay.
I was Danny Gibson, Stockton.
We're walking down the stairs, and we're looking at a wonderful friend of mine.
I'm a friend of mine.
I've never talked about Dwight Eisenhower and George Bush.
Oh, look at that.
Don't trip over those wilds, man.
I shouldn't.
Okay.
Now, there is one artist, in case you like artwork.
I do, you don't know.
There's one.
Ah, silkscreen print by Colonel Rudolph Abel, A-B-E-L.
Made while imprisoned at Atlanta Penitentiary.
And this is an original painting by Dwight Eisenhower, Christmas 1960.
It's extraordinary.
Field of the Central Intelligence Agency.
Remarkable.
Washington Redskins.
Okay.
Colonel Abel.
was what we call an illegal, a Soviet agent here, not under official cover.
And part of his cover was as a commercial artist, which accounts for his, the excellence of, comparative excellence of his drawings.
And he was a top Soviet agent in this country.
But he never broke, and we don't know,
What he did, hardly eaten at all.
The Bureau went crazy.
And if you go down to the Bureau and take their tour, they'll tell you how they caught Colonel Abel.
But they would tell you how Colonel Abel was really caught.
The Bureau gives a tour?
Oh yeah, they got a big tour around there.
Oh yeah?
Oh yeah, artifacts.
I might just have to go take it one day.
But the thing about the real fact of Colonel Abel is that he had an assistant over here named Hey Hammond.
Rhino Hey Hammond.
And Hey Hammond,
decided going back to Moscow wasn't very healthy when he was recalled.
So he walked into our embassy in Paris and said, here I am, and that broke the case.
How do we spell his name?
Hey, Hannah?
Yeah.
I'll look it up.
I'll tell you where you find all that.
There's a book by James Donovan, not related to the general, but former general counsel of OSS.
Jim Donovan and James Donovan.
Another book.
Strangers on a Bridge.
Yep.
I know.
Beautiful book.
Jim's gone now.
He's a lovely guy.
Okay, I'm going to run along, sir.
How many of you guys have that picture?
You don't watch it?
You're teasing me.
They have the writing.
Those are all my problems.
I collect the books.
Illustrated books in Winslow Holmes and Child Passams.
No, they're too long.
They're too long.
They're quintessential women.
Well, they got them.
You can't...
even those that cost you a fortune, really.